---

title: Из Финляндии в Россию на машине

date: 2015-10-12

layout: post

---
Недавно мы с Сашей ездили из Хельсинки в Петрозаводск, наш родной город. Это была короткая поездка — выходные и пара
дней. В Петрозаводск трудно добираться, транспортное сообщение не самое хорошее. Впрочем, оказалось, что на машине
удобнее всего. Я уже публиковала этот же пост на английском, чтобы мои финские друзья знали, как съездить в настоящую
Россию, а не в Питер или Москву. Сейчас напишу на русском с нюансами, важными иммигранту.

<excerpt/>

## Почему машина?

Для начала поясню, почему на машине. Конечно, это не единственный вариант. Но мне кажется, что так удобнее всего. Другие
варианты можно найти на сайте
[Rome2Rio](http://www.rome2rio.com/ru/s/%D0%A5%D0%B5%D0%BB%D1%8C%D1%81%D0%B8%D0%BD%D0%BA%D0%B8/%D0%9F%D0%B5%D1%82%D1%80%D0%BE%D0%B7%D0%B0%D0%B2%D0%BE%D0%B4%D1%81%D0%BA).

Дешевле и быстрее всего можно проехать прямым автобусом. Это автобусы российских компаний, ходят каждый день. В
некоторые дни бывает по 2 или 3 автобусы. Но всё таки такое путешествие занимает до 13 часов. Если автобус отправляется
в 8 утра, он прибудет в 8 вечера. То есть вам потребуется потратить целый день. Автобусы ходят и ночью, с 8 вечера до 8
утра. Но я пробовала спать в автобусе, и мне не понравилось. Обычно получается, что следующий день потерян.

Автобусы удобный, с туалетами и одеялками. Но всё равно места в немного, особенно если на соседнем кресле тоже кто-то
едет.

Из плюсов автобуса: они проходят границу без очереди. Вся процедура занимает около часа для всех пассажиров. То есть
можно быть уверенным, что прибудешь вовремя.

Другой вариант — ехать поездом с пересадкой в Питере. Это дороже, но сам процесс комфортнее. Однако, необходимость
пересадки (с одного вокзала на другой) сильно омрачает этот способ. Я бы рекомендовала так ездить, только если
планируете остановиться в Питере на 2-3 дня.

## Маршрут

Рекомендованный маршрут такой:

Хельсинки (Helsinki) — Лахти (Lahti) — Лаппеенранта (Lappeenranta) — Китее (Kitee) — Ниирала (Niirala), здесь находится
пограничный пункт — Ляскеля — Колатсельга — Пряжа — Петрозаводск.

<iframe
src="https://www.google.com/maps/embed?pb=!1m58!1m12!1m3!1d3945977.173735904!2d24.92763507997702!3d61.12398277225209!2m3!1f0!2f0!3f0!3m2!1i1024!2i768!4f13.1!4m43!3e0!4m5!1s0x46920bc796210691%3A0xcd4ebd843be2f763!2sHelsinki!3m2!1d60.1733244!2d24.941024799999997!4m5!1s0x468e2090ecf624f5%3A0x366ea5de0a7e15d7!2sNeste+Oil+Orimattila+Tuuliharja%2C+Orimattila!3m2!1d60.825630499999995!2d25.5279597!4m5!1s0x4690be3c263e712b%3A0x12804594829a161!2sABC+Viipurinportti+Lappeenranta%2C+Hirsim%C3%A4enkatu%2C+Lappeenranta!3m2!1d61.052775999999994!2d28.260175!4m5!1s0x469bc539bef430b9%3A0x40146d63c75b200!2sKitee!3m2!1d62.0984379!2d30.138004499999997!4m5!1s0x46995f4d08a2a6d3%3A0x62d9b7196c7fc150!2sNiiralan+rajanylityspaikka%2C+Tohmaj%C3%A4rvi!3m2!1d62.1719819!2d30.613665599999997!4m5!1s0x4698c269b1f5e4ff%3A0x63754189a5492f48!2sKolatselga%2C+Republic+of+Karelia%2C+Russia!3m2!1d61.678122599999995!2d32.230222!4m5!1s0x46a1ec3dd7bf1fe7%3A0xe49db0d89a0485d4!2sPetrozavodsk%2C+Republic+of+Karelia%2C+Russia!3m2!1d61.7781617!2d34.3640396!5e0!3m2!1sen!2sfi!4v1444217488751"
width="600" height="450" frameborder="0" style="border:0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Навигаторы и карты Google могут строить другие маршруты, не верьте им.

Лучше ехать по дороге на Лахти, а не на Порво, хотя на первый взгляд кажется, что через Порво быстрее. Но разница только
10 минут, а дорога на Лахти четырехполосная и туда не едут все, коу надо в Питер. Это гарантирует максимальную скорость
и более комфортное вождение.

Ближе к границе срежьте путь через Китее. После границы едьте через Колатсельгу. Есть также дорога через Суоярви, она
немного короче, но так не будет быстрее. Нужно учитывать ещё и состояние дороги, а через Колатсельгу она хорошая.

## Остановки

На таком длинном пути обязательно потребуется несколько остановок. Я рекомендую такие:

* [ABC Viipurinportti near
  Lappeenranta](https://www.google.fi/maps/place/ABC+Viipurinportti+Lappeenranta/@61.052776,28.260175,17z/data=!3m1!4b1!4m2!3m1!1s0x4690be3c263e712b:0x12804594829a161?hl=en)
* [Кафе Янисмяки (Kolmas) на российской стороне Вяртсиля](https://www.google.fi/maps/place/%D0%9A%D0%B0%D1%84%D0%B5+%C2%AB%D0%AF%D0%BD%D0%B8%D1%81%D0%BC%D1%8F%D0%BA%D0%B8%C2%BB+%D0%9A%D0%B0%D1%84%D0%B5+%C2%AB%D0%AF%D0%BD%D0%B8%D1%81%D0%BC%D1%8F%D0%BA%D0%B8%C2%BB/@62.1600155,30.6789698,17z/data=!4m2!3m1!1s0x0000000000000000:0x06646632e3861d01?hl=en)<br/>
  Кафе найдете недалеко от границы, здесь можно хорошо и дешево пообедать.<br/>
  ![](/img/janismaki.jpg)
* [Кафе в
  Колатсельге](https://www.google.fi/maps/place/61%C2%B040'43.4%22N+32%C2%B013'43.6%22E/@61.6786594,32.2283338,17z/data=!4m2!3m1!1s0x0:0x0?hl=en)<br/>
  Его даже нет на карте, ищите по координатам `[61.678716, 32.228778]`. Кафе находится на правой стороне дороги.
  Постарайтесь не пропустить его, это единственный шанс сходить в туалет с унитазом до прибытия в Петрозаводск. Я не
  шучу.
  <iframe
  src="https://www.google.com/maps/embed?pb=!1m0!3m2!1sen!2sfi!4v1444218993019!6m8!1m7!1sIGjS9gau7GMHZUId7w41Hg!2m2!1d61.67863099087004!2d32.2275131205651!3f175.7603285715304!4f-0.4981698847528975!5f1.9587109090973311"
  width="600" height="450" frameborder="0" style="border:0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

## На границе

Переход границы на пункте Ниирала-Вяртсиля не должен занимать много времени, траффик там не такой большой как на пунктах
Ленинградской области.

Если машина куплена в кредит и вы его ещё выплачиваете, вам потребуется письменное разрешение от финансовой компании на
вывоз автомобиля из Финляндии. Такое разрешение называется "proxy", его можно заказать по телефону. Обычно финансовая
компания просит подтверждение от страховой, о том что КАСКО действует и в России тоже. Это подтверждение тоже можно
заказать по телефону.

На финском пропускном пункте нужно остановить машину перед шлагбаумом. Затем и водитель и пассажиры проходят через
паспортный контроль в здании. Документы на машину нужно предоставлять при прохождении паспортного контроля. Выйдя из
здания, все могут сесть обратно в машину и ехать как только поднимется шлагбаум.

To cross the Russian border you will need to present 2 filled copies of the [custom
declaration](http://fl.customs.ru/images/articles/fl/english.pdf). Also, they ask to print it 2-sided. They will take
one copy and give another one with their stamp back to you. It will be needed to present on the way back.<br/>
You also need to have a "green card" insuarance for such a trip.

To drive into the Russian checkpoint territory, you need to presend the passports of the driver and all the passengers
at the entering point. You do not need to leave the car, just pass the documents in the opened driver's side window.

![](/img/vyartsilya-enterance.jpg)

At the Russian checkpoint stop in front of the line on the road, or in the queue. You can move forward when a border
officer waves you. There are usually several paths open, they will show where to drive. First stop in the beginning of
the path. Here you and your passengers can go to through the passport control in the first booth.

![](/img/vyartsilya-booths.jpg)

After that the passengers should go
trough the building with their luggage, which goes to X-rays. You can also keep the luggage in the car, but in this
case declare the number of suits in the custom declaration mentioned above. The driver goes to the second booth
which is in 20 meters forward. In there you need to present the custom declaration and the car documents. They take one
copy and give back another one with a stamp. Having gotten this, drive the car forward to the next line (these 20
meters), than open all the doors and the trunk. I also recommend to open the hood. This is not obligatory but can make
things faster if they want to look there. The cars are examined, sometimes with a dog. They may ask what is inside the
suits. As a result of examination you get another stamp in the custom declaration. This means that you have passed.
While this proccedure goes, the passengers who have alredy passed the border control are expected to wait you on the
side of the road after the border path. Pick them up from there.

When leaving the theritory, they will want to check all the passports at the exit, similar to what happened at the
enterance.

That's it. You are in Russia.

## Petrozavodsk

When arriving to Petrozavodsk, you may be suggested to go right at this point.

<iframe
src="https://www.google.com/maps/embed?pb=!1m18!1m12!1m3!1d30135.855822307833!2d34.181461116699225!3d61.830966848808906!2m3!1f0!2f0!3f0!3m2!1i1024!2i768!4f13.1!3m3!1m2!1s0x0%3A0x0!2zNjHCsDQ5JzE3LjEiTiAzNMKwMDgnMzEuMSJF!5e0!3m2!1sen!2sfi!4v1444291359939"
width="600" height="450" frameborder="0" style="border:0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

I recommend to keep driving to the big road junction and then move towards the city. Better road, you know.

## At the border when going back

Going back happens in reverse order.

When getting closer to the Russian checkpoint, take the curved side. The straigh one is for the tucks. And there is no
sign about it, yes :-)

![](/img/vyartsilya-gate.png)

At first, you drive to customs where you need to present your copy of the custom declaration. Then the car examination
with opening all the doors and a dog (if you are lucky). Having passed the custom control, drive to the border control
in 20 meter. A driver is allowed to go out of the car only if he or she is first in the queue. Once you are in front of
the stop line, leave the car and pass the passport control in the booth.

Your passengers should leave the car when arriving at the custom control. They go through the building. Once the driver
has finished their business, paggengers can be picked up from the side of the road.

The next stop is the Finnish border control. It goes exactly as on the way in. Stop in front of the bar. Then all the
people go through the building for the passport control. The driver also presents the car documents to the officer.
Having passed the control, all can sit into the car and drive as the toll barrier is lifted.

## Time management

Our first car jorney took 13 hours one way and 11 hours back. We drived from morning to evening. Now I don't think that
this is a best solution. However the woodland scenery is very nice, sad to spend whole day only for driving. Also, from
October to April it is becoming quite dark when you arrive to the Russian part. The road there is curvy, which is not
very comfortable in the darkness.

The better schedule would be like that:

Head from Helsinki at 17:00 or a little bit earlier. In 6 hours you are at the border. There must not be a long queue at
night, so you will pass it faster. Then you can have rest night in a hotel which you book in advance. This might be the
hotel in Vyartsilya village right after the border, or something closer to Pitkyaranta (Pitkäranta) if you will stong
enough to drive 2 more hours.

In the morning you can make the rest of the drive. With the breakfast at Kolatselga this must take 3-4 hours, which
means that you can arrive by the noon. I belive this is the best option.

Overnight staying at the Finnish part can be an option as well.

As for the way back, in the winter time it woulr be better to depart from Petrozavodsk in the morning. So the driving
will take a day. However in summer the overnight staying scheme can be used here as well.

## Tips

Bring your car to the Tikkurila station in the morning. Then you can pick it up after the working day and start your
trip. This saves 20 minutes and becomes one more reason for going trough Lahti.

Do not eat long. Half an hour must be the upper limit for your stays.

Do not bring a lot of petrol in Russia, better take on fuel there. There is a petrol station right after the border. We prefer
Lukoil a little bit father the Jänismäki cafe. Draw the full tank on the way back.
